INDIAN PENAL CODE (IPC), 1860 - KEY SECTIONS

Note: The Indian Penal Code has been replaced by the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita (BNS), 2023 effective from July 1, 2024. However, cases registered before that date continue under IPC.

CHAPTER XVI - OF OFFENCES AFFECTING THE HUMAN BODY

Section 299 - Culpable Homicide:
Whoever causes death by doing an act with the intention of causing death, or with the intention of causing such bodily injury as is likely to cause death, or with the knowledge that he is likely by such act to cause death, commits the offence of culpable homicide.

Section 300 - Murder:
Culpable homicide is murder if the act by which the death is caused is done with the intention of causing death, or if it is done with the intention of causing such bodily injury as the offender knows to be likely to cause the death of the person to whom the harm is caused, or if it is done with the intention of causing bodily injury to any person and the bodily injury intended to be inflicted is sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death, or if the person committing the act knows that it is so imminently dangerous that it must, in all probability, cause death or such bodily injury as is likely to cause death, and commits such act without any excuse for incurring the risk of causing death or such injury as aforesaid.
Punishment: Death or imprisonment for life, and fine (Section 302).

Section 304 - Punishment for Culpable Homicide not amounting to Murder:
Part I: If the act is done with the intention of causing death or such bodily injury as is likely to cause death - imprisonment for life, or imprisonment up to 10 years, and fine.
Part II: If the act is done with the knowledge that it is likely to cause death but without any intention to cause death - imprisonment up to 10 years, or fine, or both.

Section 304A - Causing Death by Negligence:
Whoever causes the death of any person by doing any rash or negligent act not amounting to culpable homicide shall be punished with imprisonment up to two years, or with fine, or with both.

Section 304B - Dowry Death:
Where the death of a woman is caused by any burns or bodily injury or occurs otherwise than under normal circumstances within seven years of her marriage and it is shown that soon before her death she was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or any relative of her husband for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry, such death shall be called "dowry death."
Punishment: Imprisonment not less than 7 years but which may extend to imprisonment for life.

Section 306 - Abetment of Suicide:
If any person commits suicide, whoever abets the commission of such suicide, shall be punished with imprisonment up to 10 years, and shall also be liable to fine.

Section 323 - Punishment for Voluntarily Causing Hurt:
Whoever voluntarily causes hurt shall be punished with imprisonment up to one year, or with fine up to one thousand rupees, or with both.

Section 354 - Assault or Criminal Force to Woman with Intent to Outrage Her Modesty:
Whoever assaults or uses criminal force to any woman, intending to outrage or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby outrage her modesty, shall be punished with imprisonment not less than one year but which may extend to five years, and with fine.

Section 354A - Sexual Harassment:
A man committing any of the following acts: (i) physical contact and advances involving unwelcome and explicit sexual overtures; (ii) a demand or request for sexual favours; (iii) showing pornography against the will of a woman; (iv) making sexually coloured remarks, shall be guilty of the offence of sexual harassment.
Punishment: For (i), (ii), (iii) - rigorous imprisonment up to 3 years, or fine, or both. For (iv) - imprisonment up to 1 year, or fine, or both.

Section 376 - Punishment for Rape:
Whoever commits rape shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for not less than 10 years but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.

Section 377 - Unnatural Offences:
Note: Section 377 was partially struck down by the Supreme Court in Navtej Singh Johar v. Union of India (2018), decriminalizing consensual sexual acts between adults.

Section 379 - Punishment for Theft:
Whoever commits theft shall be punished with imprisonment up to 3 years, or with fine, or with both.

Section 384 - Punishment for Extortion:
Whoever commits extortion shall be punished with imprisonment up to 3 years, or with fine, or with both.

Section 390 - Robbery:
In all robbery there is either theft or extortion. When theft is robbery: Theft is "robbery" if, in order to the committing of the theft, or in committing the theft, or in carrying away or attempting to carry away property obtained by the theft, the offender, for that end, voluntarily causes or threatens or attempts to cause to any person death or hurt or wrongful restraint, or fear of instant death or of instant hurt, or of instant wrongful restraint.

Section 406 - Punishment for Criminal Breach of Trust:
Whoever commits criminal breach of trust shall be punished with imprisonment up to 3 years, or with fine, or with both.

Section 415 - Cheating:
Whoever, by deceiving any person, fraudulently or dishonestly induces the person so deceived to deliver any property to any person, or to consent that any person shall retain any property, or intentionally induces the person so deceived to do or omit to do anything which he would not do or omit if he were not so deceived, and which act or omission causes or is likely to cause damage or harm to that person in body, mind, reputation or property, is said to "cheat."

Section 420 - Cheating and Dishonestly Inducing Delivery of Property:
Whoever cheats and thereby dishonestly induces the person deceived to deliver any property to any person, or to make, alter or destroy the whole or any part of a valuable security, or anything which is signed or sealed, and which is capable of being converted into a valuable security, shall be punished with imprisonment up to 7 years, and shall also be liable to fine.

Section 498A - Husband or Relative of Husband of a Woman Subjecting Her to Cruelty:
Whoever, being the husband or the relative of the husband of a woman, subjects such woman to cruelty shall be punished with imprisonment up to 3 years and shall also be liable to fine. This is a cognizable and non-bailable offence.

Section 499 - Defamation:
Whoever by words either spoken or intended to be read, or by signs or by visible representations, makes or publishes any imputation concerning any person intending to harm, or knowing or having reason to believe that such imputation will harm, the reputation of such person, is said to defame that person.
Punishment (Section 500): Simple imprisonment up to 2 years, or with fine, or with both.

Section 506 - Punishment for Criminal Intimidation:
Whoever commits the offence of criminal intimidation shall be punished with imprisonment up to 2 years, or with fine, or with both. If threat be to cause death or grievous hurt - imprisonment up to 7 years, or fine, or both.
